From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
For decades, the government has
struggled with how to police monopolies
in the tech industry. And this week, a
landmark ruling in a case against Google
marked the most aggressive attempt in
the modern era to level the playing
field.
Today, my colleague David McCabe on who
won, who lost, and what this means for
the race to dominate artificial
intelligence.
It's Thursday, September 4th.
So, David, a year ago, a federal judge
decided that Google had broken the law
to maintain its dominance over search.
That basically it had legally maintained
its monopoly. And since then, everyone
has been waiting to see what the
punishment could be because the
punishment in this case could have
enormous implications for the tech
industry. And here we are this week, the
decision comes out, the punishment is
clear, and it seems like a slap on the
wrist.
>> Yeah. So, on Tuesday, a little bit after
4:00 p.m., I get a message from someone
we work with that just said, "It's
dropped."
>> And I knew immediately what they were
talking about.
>> Basically, that your day was going to be
completely scrambled. Yeah, we had been
preparing for this for a long time and
now it was go time and we start making
our way through this ruling. It's 223
pages long, but it becomes clear within
minutes that this is really a win for
Google and a blow to the government's
efforts over now two different
presidents to reign in the power of
Silicon Valley. Google had avoided the
harshest penalties in this case. It had
not been broken up as the government had
asked. So, it was not forced to sell
Chrome, its popular web browser. It was
forced to share some of its data and its
search results with its rivals, but on
terms that did not require it to hand
over all of its secret sauce. And it was
telling that despite the fact that
Google was being mandated to do some of
these things, it stock price actually
jumped after the ruling.
[Music]
>> Well, I mean, earlier I mentioned this
felt like a slap on the wrist. And I
think that I felt that way because as a
non- tech person, I guess the idea that
you would have to share data with your
rivals, like that doesn't seem like the
worst fate that could befall a company
as big as Google, which is what, worth
trillions of dollars, something like
that.
>> Yeah. And especially after just a year
ago, he issued a ruling that declared in
no uncertain terms that they were a
monopolist and they had acted illegally.
Right. That was a big ruling and a loss
for Google,
>> right? So, how does this judge go from
declaring that Google is illegally
protecting its monopoly to basically
delivering a penalty that is so lenient
or benign, however you want to call it,
that the stock price actually jumps?
>> The answer to that question has a lot to
do with artificial intelligence, which
has for the first time in decades called
into question whether Google will own
the future of how people look for
information online.
>> So, tell me a little bit more about
that. Like, where does the story start?
It starts in 2020. So the first Trump
administration had decided that they
were going to investigate concerns about
the power of the biggest tech companies,
>> right? I remember that.
>> Yeah. Not just Google, but Amazon and
Apple.
>> And they said that Google had amassed
and maintained a monopoly over the
search business. They said that its
behavior had crushed its competition,
made it hard for even big companies like
Microsoft to build a search engine that
could match Google's dominance. They
said that it had led Google to make an
inferior product and they said that
ultimately this had hurt consumers
>> because they were getting access to an
inferior product or what was the harm
exactly?
>> The harm was that Google now outside of
a competitive marketplace was able to
make an inferior product and ultimately
that consumers had less choice, right?
That if they didn't like how Google was
say collecting their personal data that
they couldn't go somewhere else that was
as effective at giving them the answers
that they needed from the internet.
That's actually really interesting
because I think when we think of
antitrust cases, we normally think of
like a price harm, like consumers are
getting harmed because they're paying
more for such and such product. But
here, it's that the product that they're
not even paying for is inferior and also
that it's about their data and their
privacy, which feels a little bit
unusual.
>> Yeah, you're right. Antitrust law often
in the last many decades has looked at
is there a price increase for consumers
and Google ultimately has a cost of $0.
So what were the arguments on both sides
of this case? What was the government
saying and what was Google saying in its
defense?
>> So at the heart of the government's case
were payments that Google has made for
many years to companies like Apple and
Mozilla that make web browsers and to
companies like Samsung that make
smartphones to basically make its search
engine the automatically selected search
engine that comes up when you open your
phone or you enter a query into the top
of your web browser. And these payments
amounted ultimately in some cases to
billions of dollars. In 2021, Google
paid at $26.3 billion as part of these
deals. So, it's not funny money, right?
It's real money.
>> And the government said that that set in
motion a pernitious flywheel effect.
Google paid for the prime placement
which meant more people searched on
Google which meant Google had more data
about what people are searching for
which they used to make their product
better
>> which in turn made it more likely that
Google would get the prime placement and
that effectively this pernitious
flywheel spun and spun and spun and
blocked out even big companies who were
trying to compete in search.
>> Google is so dominant it's using its
dominance to crush competition, make its
product better and therefore you're more
likely to choose it anyway as a
consumer.
>> Exactly. This basically just entrenched
their power over and over again.
>> This feels like an argument that
actually serves both sides of this
lawsuit.
>> Well, exactly. Google said people choose
us because we are better. They argued
that they have invested again and again
in making search the best product it can
be and that people chose not because
Google was making these payments, not
because it was the automatically
selected search engine in their web
browser, but because it had simply won
on the merits. It seems worth noting
here that Google obviously one of the
biggest tech companies in the world, one
of the most profitable tech companies in
the world, a company that has come to
define how we use the internet. This
case seems to be existential for it in
some ways. And it feels like that is a
lot of power to put in the hands of this
one judge who basically has like the
future of Google in his hands and his
hands alone.
>> That's right. And once he ruled in 2024
that Google had abused its power, had
illegally maintained a monopoly, that
pressure only increased because he had
to figure out what to do about it. And
that's a question that didn't just have
implications for Google. It had
implications for the entire industry,
for the entire internet, and everybody
who used the internet. And it seemed as
though he might be poised to do
something that would radically disrupt
the technology industry.
>> Right? And that was really crystallized
for me in the closing arguments of the
second phase of the trial, the remedies
phase.
>> Okay. And why why did that crystallize
for you then?
>> So the judge in this case, Amit Ma of
the district court in Washington, he
holds his cards close to the vest. He's
very careful and he's had three weeks of
testimony almost like a second trial. Uh
he's had three weeks of testimony from
witnesses. He's heard evidence and then
he does closing arguments
>> for a full day. He just drilled into
these lawyers about the big picture
issues in the case but also about really
small questions and it just in some ways
deciding that Google had broken the law
>> was the simple part right it was a clear
legal question it was about basically
these contracts and now the questions
before him had multiplied significantly
>> basically it's like it was much easier
and simpler to decide that they had
broken the law than it was to figure out
what to do about it.
>> That's right. And fundamentally, there's
a reason for that. The first phase of
this trial was about the past. The
second stage was about the future. And
the future of finding information on the
internet is murkier than ever.
While this battle was playing out in the
courtroom, there was a different battle
playing out in Silicon Valley between
titans like Google and smaller startups
to dominate what had become an AI boom.
And ultimately the fight outside of the
courtroom made its way into the
courtroom
>> and the judge in this case had to adjust
to this new reality. And ultimately it
changed the course of the case.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So David, how is it that AI became so
central to the outcome of this case?
>> Yeah. So when this case was filed in
2020, people probably had a general
understanding that the data that Google
had was valuable not just for search but
for the development of artificial
intelligence.
Then that theoretical idea turned into
reality.
In November of 2022, as this case is
barreling towards trial, OpenAI releases
chat GBT. And I think people know what
happened next.
This explosion of AI chat bots. These
products where you can ask it a
question, it responds as though it's a
human. They can spit out and generate
images. And money starts pouring into
this space. Companies start investing in
the construction of data centers and
other infrastructure that's required for
this technology. venture capitalists
start funding more and more of these
startups.
>> And it is exactly at this moment that
this case, which is about how for a
decade information had worked online,
goes to trial.
Can you just explain a little bit more
what does the data that you're talking
about have to do with Google's efforts
with AI and what the remedy should be
for whether it's legally enforcing a
monopoly? So Google search is built on
reams and reams of data and information.
>> Basically a map of the internet.
Generative artificial intelligence
models are also built on data and
information.
>> Right? These large language models
ingest a ton of information, a ton of
text so that they can then generate
these responses to your questions. And
so suddenly there is a question about
whether or not the advantage that Google
has had and maintained in search can
basically transmute into an advantage
and dominance in artificial
intelligence.
But of course that hasn't really
happened yet.
>> Google really is under challenge from
companies like OpenAI and Perplexity.
They have their own chatbot Gemini but
it is not the dominant chatbot.
>> Right? There are a million AI companies
or at least what feel like a million AI
companies that have sprung up that
people are asking questions to.
>> Yeah, I was just in San Francisco and
all the billboards and ads in the
airport are about AI. And we know these
products. There's Claude, there's Grock,
there's Catch EPT.
>> And we should just note here that the
New York Times has sued Catch's parent
company, OpenAI, and one of its
investors, Microsoft, claiming copyright
infringement of news content related to
these AI systems. And the two companies
have denied the suits claims. But please
continue.
>> That's right. And consumers have started
to change their behavior because of
these chatbots. They're now using them
like they might have used a search
engine. They're asking it questions that
they might have previously asked Google.
>> Yes, I'm I feel like I'm very frequently
going to uh Gemini or Chat GBT and
asking a question I might have normally
asked Google.
>> Right. And this transformation is
starting to play out as this case gets
underway, but it doesn't come up in the
first phase of the trial.
>> The first phase being when the judge
says, "Yes, I've determined that you're
acting illegally."
>> That's right. But as soon as he
triggered the second phase of the trial,
the how do I fix this phase of the
trial,
>> suddenly he has to face this
transformation of the tech industry head
on.
>> How so?
>> Because now Google could come into the
courtroom and say, "Look, the rise of
these AI products proves that the market
is working, that you do not need to make
some radical intervention." And on the
flip side, the government came into his
courtroom and said, "If you do not act
aggressively,
>> Google will use the tactics it used to
illegally protect its monopoly in search
and use them to monopolize and dominate
artificial intelligence."
>> Basically, they will use one monopoly to
create another monopoly.
>> Precisely.
>> What is the judge's actual remedy here?
>> I would think of this in two different
buckets.
>> Okay. remember the deals that Google did
with Apple and Mozilla and Samsung to be
that automatic search engine that comes
up in your browser or your smartphone.
>> Yes, I do.
>> So, this is at the heart of the case.
Okay.
>> And I think it's something that a lot of
people thought the judge would ban
outright because it was so central to
the government's case to the monopoly
that he had found that Google had
illegally maintained.
But he takes a slightly different
tactic. He bars Google from entering
into those deals in some cases, most
notably when they are exclusive.
But he does not ban them from paying for
that great real estate entirely.
>> So what does that mean? That Apple could
just be like, "Okay, sure. We'll take
your $20 billion and you can be the main
search engine when somebody opens up
their browser, but we're also going to
have duck.go."
>> Well, this is a big question. What is a
non-exclusive default? It would seem
that by the nature of a default, there
is only one, right?
>> Mhm. But it was for example discussed
during the trial that Apple could offer
a different default in the normal
browsing mode and in the private
browsing mode. Right? You could imagine
that they would install a privacy
focused search engine as the default in
incognito mode. So perhaps that is an
example of a non-exclusive default. But
where the rubber will hit the road on
this part of the remedies is exactly how
these two things that seem like they
might be in conflict resolve.
>> Okay. So you mentioned there were two
buckets. Sounds like that's one bucket.
>> Mhm. The second bucket is requiring
Google to share some of the data
>> that makes it powerful.
>> Okay.
>> They will be required to syndicate their
search results to quote unquote
qualified competitors. Essentially that
a qualified competitor to Google could
display Google's search results which
are seen as very high quality rather
than their own maybe inferior search
results. Right? erasing that quality
advantage. Now, the government didn't
get everything they wanted there because
Google's going to be able to do so
basically on the terms of commercial
agreements that they already have to do
this. So, it's not a huge change for
them because they already offer deals
like this, but of course, now they're
being required by a court to offer them.
The second part of sharing what makes
Google Google is they are required to
give those qualified competitors the
sort of top level of what is called the
search index.
>> Hm. I have no idea what that is. Yeah,
it's a a kind of wonky term, but it
basically means the corpus of web pages
and information that make up Google
results. And so they have to hand that
over to rivals who have said that it's
very hard to build your own search
index. And so this was this kind of
insurmountable advantage that only
Google had. But there's a catch. The
judge said that Google doesn't have to
share a lot of the data it uses to rank
the popularity of those pages. the kind
of one layer down that they use to make
really quality results.
>> Wait, that would seem like it's sort of
the secret sauce as you mentioned to
Google, right? Like the whole point of
using Google is that you get the search
results you want immediately like on the
top page.
>> Yeah. And the government wanted them to
share all of the secret sauce and
ultimately the judge did mandate sharing
of some data like that, but not all of
what the government asked for.
>> But as you mentioned earlier, all this
to say, he's not actually breaking up
Google, which was one of the things that
they were really worried about, right?
like he's not forcing them to spin off
Chrome or Android products or anything
like that.
>> That's right. And this was like the
biggest ask that the government made
that Google be forced to spin off
Chrome. It's a wildly popular web
browser. It's used by billions of people
around the world. And potentially, if
competition didn't improve after the
remedies, that the court be allowed to
make them spin off Android, their
smartphone operating system. And the
logic behind this was that those are
both places where Google is able to
absorb search queries, right? people use
the Chrome web browser to search for
information through Google. And so the
idea was it was a source of web traffic
which was really valuable to Google.
>> The judge said no go. He said this was
an overreach that the government was
asking for something so aggressive that
wasn't justified under the law set in
previous antitrust cases. You know, as
we talked about, it's a really unusual
position for a judge to be in to have to
make such a huge decision while this
whole technological transformation is
underway in the background. And I'm just
curious if he ever addressed that or if
that came up for you at all during the
reporting.
>> Yeah. So, in many ways, this is the
broader framing of this ruling. He says,
"I'm not an expert in search engines.
>> I'm not an expert in artificial
intelligence." He says it's not a
judge's forte to look into a crystal
ball and tell the future.
>> And where that ultimately led him was
this place. He said a court needs to
apply remedies like this with humility
and that's what I've done. And that
logic led him to this pretty measured
decision.
>> So it sort of seems like this AI boom
that we've been talking about in some
ways reverse a thinking on whether
Google is a monopoly at all because
Google basically argued, hey look, we're
not just competing against Duck Duck. Go
or Bing were competing against Amazon
and Netflix, etc. And that wasn't
compelling to the judge at the time, but
now they actually legitimately do have
tons of competition in another realm,
which is AI. And so I wonder if that is
the reason in part why the judge
essentially gave them something that
feels like a slap on the wrist to a lot
of people at least.
>> He said that it was a motivating factor
in how he reached his decision. We
talked about how he didn't ban those
payments to Apple and Samsung and
Mozilla for that great real estate for
the search engine.
>> And he said that one reason he was doing
that was he felt that the explosion of
these AI chatbots could create companies
that could compete with Google on the
merits.
>> Basically that perhaps Google's
financial might when met with a real
challenge from an innovative company
would not be enough to ensure their
dominance. which makes me just sort of
wonder about where consumers fit into
all of this and how consumers are
likely, if at all, going to feel the
results of this ruling or the remedy
that the judge is recommending.
>> Yeah. And I don't know that consumers
will see an impact from this
immediately.
>> Google is almost certain to appeal this
underlying liability decision
>> which would take potentially years,
>> potentially years. Uh the government
could appeal this remedies decision. Uh
so this will probably be mired in the
courts for a long time which could very
well lead to
>> the remedies being paused while that is
being hashed out. And then the remedies
themselves are not immediately about the
consumer experience. They don't mandate
for example a choice screen which is a a
wonky term for basically a a screen that
pops up on your smartphone and says
which search engine do you want? That's
something consumers would see
immediately. That's not the direction
the judge went.
>> Right? And so instead the question will
be does this sort of basket of changes
shift the arc of the technology industry
enough that maybe several years from now
consumers maybe do see more innovative
products that compete with Google that
offer them that experience of finding
information online in in new and
different ways and ultimately allow
companies that produce those products to
really thrive despite Google's size and
might. So basically like it's not
immediately clear how consumers are
going to feel this if at all but it
sounds like there could be downstream
effects of this case that are
unpredictable that consumers could feel.
>> There could be and to understand how
it's helpful to look to the past. So
more than two decades ago the federal
government sued Microsoft. This was the
last big tech antitrust case to get this
far
>> over allegations that Microsoft had hurt
competition when it came to personal
computers and internet browsers. They
were battling with I don't know if you
remember Netscape.
>> Yes, of course. Yeah. And ultimately the
remedies in that case were not
dissimilar from the remedies in this
Google. But there has been a persistent
argument that the fact of that scrutiny
was enough to make Microsoft afraid of
its own shadow precisely at a time when
the internet was enabling a new
generation of startups
>> such as Google such as Google. And that
as a result, Microsoft was not as
aggressive in competing against Google.
And that that case opened the door just
enough for Google to become the company
it is today.
It's kind of interesting actually to
note that Google took advantage of a
cultural shift at a company that was
scared because of a government lawsuit.
And now the question is, could there be
a cultural shift at Google that would
then maybe change the future landscape
of tech in ways that are unpredictable
now, but that consumers certainly may
feel down the line?
>> That is one of the big questions. It was
clear throughout this trial that Google
has learned from the Microsoft
experience. There were documents that
came out that showed that they looked at
the way the Microsoft had put itself at
risk during its trial in order to guide
their own policies around retaining
documents and what people should say.
>> A number of their lawyers in different
ways had worked on the Microsoft case.
One of their lawyers worked for
Netscape.
>> So it is clear they have learned from
that history before. And I think a
question is can they successfully avoid
the trap that Microsoft may have fallen
into.
>> So in the Microsoft case the biggest
effect of that was not necessarily the
actual outcome but the fear of God that
the government put into this company
that then made it behave differently
with its competitors. That led to the
rise of this behemoth that is Google.
And now we're having sort of a similar
question, which is, will the very
existence of this case affect the way
that Google operates, affect its
culture, affect how it feels spiritually
about its competitors as we're on this
sort of horizon of AI? And I just sort
of wonder how you're thinking about the
government's attempts to regulate an
industry it has struggled to get its
arms around throughout multiple
administrations, Democrat and
Republican. I mean, this decision is a
blow to those efforts.
>> And it's striking to me because the
Justice Department undertook a
monumental effort to bring this case to
trial. These rulings are landmark
decisions. And still, when people looked
at the ruling yesterday, their reaction
was that it pald in comparison to the
speed and scale at which the technology
industry is barreling ahead.
>> Mhm. And I just read an interesting
analysis by my colleague Steve Lure who
covered the Microsoft case and he
basically said that this decision is a
new set of rules for the tech giants to
play by, but the game's still going.
>> And so the question is, has the judge in
this case changed the rules of the game
enough to give one of the rookie players
enough space on the field to compete
with Google? or have the rules changed
too little and Google will just play the
game again and win again.
[Music]
>> Dave McCabe, pleasure speaking with you.
>> Thank you for having me.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today. As the
US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention deals with an exodus of top
scientists, a number of states have
decided to go their own contradictory
ways on vaccines. California, Oregon,
and Washington said they would work
together to review scientific data,
saying that the CDC could no longer be
trusted.
Florida, in contrast, said it would get
rid of all vaccine requirements.
The moves come at a moment of
unparalleled turmoil at the CDC, where
health secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr.,
a vaccine skeptic, has taken control of
the AY's vaccine decisions.
And Harvard University won a crucial
legal victory in its clash with the
Trump administration on Wednesday when a
federal judge said the government had
broken the law by freezing billions of
dollars in research funds in the name of
stamping out anti-semitism.
The ruling may give Harvard more
leverage in its ongoing settlement talks
with the Trump administration, which
Harvard had sued over the funding cuts.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Wyn and Caitlyn O'Keefe. It was edited
by Liz O Balin and Paige Cowittat and
was engineered by Chris Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]